Compound Poisson Process of Mass Extinction (COMET) EBD analysis (May et al. 2016): 

We used the episodic birth-death model implemented in the R package TESS (Höhna, 2013). It employs Compound Poisson Process (CPP) prior distributions to independently estimate shifts in the rate of speciation and extinction at discrete time points, with these rates remaining constant between time intervals. The user can estimate the timing and magnitude of rate shifts, and to assess the statistical significance of these shifts using Reversible-jump MCMC and dynamic Bayes Factor tests. 

We used the default options provided in TESS: the expected_number_of_events was set to 2, which assigns 50% prior probability to zero rate shifts; the form of the prior probability distribution for the speciation and extinction rates was estimated using an empirical Bayesian approach. Incomplete taxon sampling in the phylogeny –which could bias parameter estimation– was accounted for using the parameter rho, fixed at 0.89 to reflect nearly 90% species sampling. We ran two runs with one million-generations each, and assessed stationarity and convergence to the true parameter values by using the convergence diagnostics in TESS. Specifically, we used the effective sample size diagnostic, which counts the number of independent samples for each parameter relative to the MCMC chain length, i.e., a measure of autocorrelation. Low ESS values indicate high autocorrelation between samples and high uncertainty in parameter values; values higher than 100 or 200 samples indicate, respectively, moderate or high precision in the parameter estimates. Reproducibility was assessed using the Gelman-Rubin test, which compares the variance in the sampled parameter values from two independent simulations. 

Scripts to run these analyses: "CoMET_Analysis_Eucalypts.R" (main script to source in TESS); "tess.plot.output.mod.R" (modify the x-axis (geological time scale) to make it more detailed); "tess.plot.output.mod.ymin.R" (modification to change the Y axis so that it does not start in zero (important for speciation and extinction rates if they never drop to zero).
